---
title: ISPConfig 3 installation on Debian and Ubuntu
description: Learn how to install ISPConfig on Debian 11, 12 and Ubuntu 22.04, 24.04
updated_at: 2025-02-23
slug: install-ispconfig3
author_name: Finn Weiss
author_url: https://github.com/finnweiss/
author_image: https://f-w.dev/racoon.jpg
author_bio: 
tags: [web, mysql, linux, debian, mariadb, ubuntu, ispconfig]
netcup_product_url: https://www.netcup.com/de/server/vps
language: en
available_languages: en, de
---

# Introduction

In this tutorial you will learn how to install ISPConfig on Debian 11, 12 and Ubuntu 22.04, 24.04.

I am currently doing the installation on a VPS 500 G11s under Debain 12, but the installation should also work on any other VPS and with a different version of Debain or Ubuntu.
# Requirements

You need an updated server on which you have root rights.
# Installing ISPConfig3

## 1. Configure the Hostname and Hosts File

Your server’s hostname should be a subdomain like `server1.example.com`. **Do not** use a domain name without a subdomain part (e.g., `example.com`) as your hostname, as this may cause issues with your setup later.

### 1.1 Verify and Update the `/etc/hosts` File

First, check the hostname in the `/etc/hosts` file and modify it if necessary. The line should follow this format:

```
IP address  -  full hostname (including domain)  -  subdomain part
```

Edit the file using:

```bash
nano /etc/hosts
```

A correct example for `server1.example.com`:

```
127.0.0.1 localhost.localdomain   localhost
# This line should be updated to the correct server name:
127.0.1.1 server1.example.com server1

# The following lines are recommended for IPv6-compatible hosts:
::1     localhost ip6-localhost ip6-loopback
ff02::1 ip6-allnodes
ff02::2 ip6-allrouters
```

### 1.2 Edit the `/etc/hostname` File

Next, update the hostname configuration in the `/etc/hostname` file:

```bash
nano /etc/hostname
```

It should contain **only** the subdomain part:

```
server1
```

### 1.3 Apply the Changes

To apply the new hostname, restart the server:

```bash
reboot
```

After rebooting, log in again and verify that the hostname is set correctly:

```bash
hostname
hostname -f
```

The output should match the following:

```
root@server1:~$ hostname
server1
root@server1:~$ hostname -f
server1.example.com
```

## 2. Installing ISPConfig

We can now run the automated ISPConfig installer. The basic setup includes the following software packages (and their dependencies):  
**Apache2, PHP (versions 5.6 – 8.3), MariaDB, Postfix, Dovecot, Rspamd, BIND, Jailkit, Roundcube, PHPMyAdmin, Mailman, Webalizer, AWStats, and GoAccess.**

### 2.1 Run the Installation Script

Start the installation by running:

```bash
wget -O - https://get.ispconfig.org | sh -s -- --unattended-upgrades
```

After a while, you will see the following message:

```
WARNING! This script will reconfigure your complete server!
It should be run on a freshly installed server and all current configuration that you have done will most likely be lost!
Type 'yes' if you really want to continue:
```

Type **"yes"** and press **Enter** to proceed. The installation will begin.

### 2.2 Handling Installation Errors

If you encounter the following error:

```
[ERROR] Exception occurred: ISPConfigOSException -> Command mount -o remount / 2>&1 && quotaoff -avug 2>&1 && quotacheck -avugm 2>&1 && quotaon -avug 2>&1 failed. (/ispconfig.ai.php:15)
```

Use this modified installation command instead:

```bash
wget -O - https://get.ispconfig.org | sh -s -- --unattended-upgrades --no-quota
```

### 2.3 Completing the Installation

Once the installation is complete, you will see the ISPConfig administrator password and MySQL root password:

```
[INFO] Your ISPConfig admin password is: 5GvfSSSYsdfdYC
[INFO] Your MySQL root password is: kkAkft82d!kafMwqxdtYs
```

You can now access the ISPConfig web interface at:

```
http://your-server-ip:8080
```

Log in with the username **"admin"** and the password provided during the installation.



# License

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicence, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE
SOFTWARE.

# Contributor's Certificate of Origin

By making a contribution to this project, I certify that:

1.  The contribution was created in whole or in part by me and I have the right to submit it under the license indicated in the file; or

2.  The contribution is based upon previous work that, to the best of my knowledge, is covered under an appropriate license and I have the right under that license to submit that work with modifications, whether created in whole or in part by me, under the same license (unless I am permitted to submit under a different license), as indicated in the file; or

3.  The contribution was provided directly to me by some other person who certified (a), (b) or (c) and I have not modified it.

4.  I understand and agree that this project and the contribution are public and that a record of the contribution (including all personal information I submit with it, including my sign-off) is maintained indefinitely and may be redistributed consistent with this project or the license(s) involved.
